ft_irc
Internet Relay Chat

Summary: This project is about creating your own IRC server.
You will use an actual IRC client to connect to your server and test it.

The Internet is governed by solid standard protocols that allow connected computers to
interact with each other.

It’s always beneficial to understand these protocols.

Chapter I
Introduction

Internet Relay Chat or IRC is a text-based communication protocol on the Internet.
It offers real-time messaging that can be either public or private. Users can exchange
direct messages and join group channels.

IRC clients connect to IRC servers in order to join channels. IRC servers are connected
together to form a network.

Chapter II
General rules

• Your program should not crash in any circumstances (even when it runs out of
memory), and should not quit unexpectedly.
If it happens, your project will be considered non-functional and your grade will be
0.

• You have to turn in a Makefile which will compile your source files. It must not
perform unnecessary relinking.

• Your Makefile must at least contain the rules:
$(NAME), all, clean, fclean and re.

• Compile your code with c++ using the flags -Wall -Wextra -Werror.
• Your code must comply with the C++ 98 standard. Then, it should still compile

if you add the flag -std=c++98.
• Try to always code using C++ features when available (for example, choose <cstring>

over <string.h>). You are allowed to use C functions, but always prefer their C++
versions if possible.

• Any external library and Boost libraries are forbidden.

Chapter IV
Mandatory Part

Program Name ircserv
Files to Submit Makefile, *.{h, hpp}, *.cpp, *.tpp, *.ipp,

an optional configuration file
Makefile with rules: NAME, all, clean, fclean, re
Arguments port: The listening port

password: The connection password

Alowed functions:
socket, close, setsockopt, getsockname,
getprotobyname, gethostbyname, getaddrinfo,
freeaddrinfo, bind, connect, listen, accept,
htons, htonl, ntohs, ntohl, inet_addr, inet_ntoa,
inet_ntop, send, recv, signal, sigaction,
sigemptyset, sigfillset, sigaddset, sigdelset,
sigismember, lseek, fstat, fcntl, poll (or
equivalent)

Description:
An IRC server in C++ 98
You are required to develop an IRC server using the C++ 98 standard.

You must not develop an IRC client.
You must not implement server-to-server communication.

Your executable will be run as follows:
./ircserv <port> <password>

• port: The port number on which your IRC server will be listening for incoming
IRC connections.

• password: The connection password. It will be needed by any IRC client that tries
to connect to your server.

Even though poll() is mentioned in the subject and the evaluation
scale, you may use any equivalent such as select(), kqueue(), or
epoll().

IV.1 Requirements
• The server must be capable of handling multiple clients simultaneously without

hanging.
• Forking is prohibited. All I/O operations must be non-blocking.
• Only 1 poll() (or equivalent) can be used for handling all these operations (read,

write, but also listen, and so forth).

Because you have to use non-blocking file descriptors, it is
possible to use read/recv or write/send functions with no poll()
(or equivalent), and your server wouldn’t be blocking.
However, it would consume more system resources.
Therefore, if you attempt to read/recv or write/send in any file
descriptor without using poll() (or equivalent), your grade will be
0.

• Several IRC clients exist. You have to choose one of them as a reference. Your
reference client will be used during the evaluation process.

• Your reference client must be able to connect to your server without encountering
any error.

• Communication between client and server has to be done via TCP/IP (v4 or v6).
• Using your reference client with your server must be similar to using it with any

official IRC server. However, you only have to implement the following features:

◦ You must be able to authenticate, set a nickname, a username, join a channel,
send and receive private messages using your reference client.

◦ All the messages sent from one client to a channel have to be forwarded to
every other client that joined the channel.

◦ You must have operators and regular users.
◦ Then, you have to implement the commands that are specific to channel

operators:
∗ KICK - Eject a client from the channel
∗ INVITE - Invite a client to a channel
∗ TOPIC - Change or view the channel topic
∗ MODE - Change the channel’s mode:

· i: Set/remove Invite-only channel
· t: Set/remove the restrictions of the TOPIC command to channel

operators
· k: Set/remove the channel key (password)
· o: Give/take channel operator privilege
· l: Set/remove the user limit to channel

• Of course, you are expected to write a clean code.
